Restructure Getting Started documentation to be more compact and beginner friendly (#9212)
haskell/cabal: doc/getting-started.rst

> Getting Started

Reviewer: Extreme nitpic, following line could be lenght-adjusted

Author: Done

======================================

> Installing Cabal

Reviewer: This is the only line I am a bit unsure about: it is true that `Installing Cabal` is simpler and more beginner friendly, but maybe the beginner is reassured by something like `Installing Cabal (and the Haskell toolchain)`.

Author: I would like the title to focus on Cabal (since it's the Cabal documentation). The Haskell toolchain is one method; We could mention the usual OS package managers (e.g. for Debian, Ubuntu, Mac, Windows, NixOS?) or how to install Cabal from source.

> --------------------------------

Reviewer: lenght-adjusting here too.

Author: Done

Getting Started
===============

Installing Cabal
----------------

The easiest and recommended way to install the ``cabal`` commandline tool 
on Linux, macOS, FreeBSD or Windows is through `ghcup <https://www.haskell.org/ghcup/>`__. 
It installs the "Haskell toolchain" which includes Cabal,
the Haskell compiler `GHC <https://www.haskell.org/ghc/>`__ 
and optionally other useful Haskell tools.

> Creating a Haskell package

Reviewer 2: The word "application" was deliberately chosen so that the newcomers know that this is the section they should read in order to learn how to create applications with cabal. The word "package", although technically ("more") correct, is intimidating: generally, newcomers don't look for creating packages in a broad sense (and as newcomers they don't know the precise technical sense in the case of cabal packages), because a package in a broad sense is a piece of reusable functionality, which is not what newcomers are after, most of the time.

Reviewer 3: I feel strongly about making a distinction between a package and a project. A package is the unit of source code distribution. If you are a deploying applications, you are not distributing source code and you have a different set of problem from those who do.
I am on mobile and I dont remember the content of this section but "application" ~ project.

Author: Indeed. "application" seems to be target outcome of this mini-guide, which also fits the "myapp" package name.

--------------------------

We create a minimal Haskell application to get a quick overview 
about the ``cabal`` commandline tool:

1. How to initialize a Haskell package.
2. How files are organized inside a package.
3. How to compile Haskell files and run a resulting executable.
4. How to manage external dependencies.

> Initializing a package

Reviewer 2: Ditto.

Author: Done

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To initialize a new Haskell application, run

.. code-block:: console

    $ cabal init myapp --non-interactive

in a terminal. This generates the following files in a new ``myapp`` folder:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tree
    .
    └── myapp
        ├── app
        │   └── Main.hs
        ├── CHANGELOG.md
        └── myapp.cabal

> ``myapp.cabal`` is Cabal's metadata file which describes your package,

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
``myapp.cabal`` is a package description file (commonly referred as "a Cabal file"), which describes the package
```

> its dependencies and how it is built:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
its dependencies, and how it is built:
```
oxford commas FTW

Reviewer 2: Actually, I think it'd be good to be a little more precise here and say that a package description contains package metadata and a sequence of sections, each defining a _package component_. Components can be of one of several types (executables, libraries, etc.). Every component describes, among other things, the location of source files and its dependencies. 

Could you integrate this description into the text?

Author: Done

.. code-block:: cabal

    cabal-version:      3.0
    name:               myapp
    version:            0.1.0.0
    -- ...

    executable myapp
        import:           warnings
        main-is:          Main.hs
        build-depends:    base ^>=4.19.0.0
        hs-source-dirs:   app
        default-language: Haskell2010

> The ``executable`` section shows that this package's build output 
> is an executable called ``myapp`` that we can run on the command line. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``executable`` section shows that this package has a single component
of the executable type named ``myapp``.
```

Kinda obvious that executables can be run (from command line or otherwise)...

I'd prefer that the notion of `component` was introduced early on and used consistently across the text.

> The ``build-depends`` section contains a list of all package dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``build-depends`` section contains a list of the component's dependencies.
```

> The ``build-depends`` section contains a list of all internal and external dependencies.

Reviewer 2: "internal and external dependencies" is something not specified so far and doesn't really align with cabal's vocabulary I think, e g there are "internal libraries", yes, but I don't think the manual mentions "internal dependencies" anywhere (you could check though). I suggest KISS:
```suggestion
The ``build-depends`` section contains a list of package dependencies.
```

Author: Done

``app/Main.hs`` is where your executable's code lives:

.. code-block:: haskell

    module Main where

    main :: IO ()
    main = putStrLn "Hello, Haskell!"

> To run the executable, switch into the project folder with ``cd myapp`` and  run 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the executable, switch into the project directory with ``cd myapp`` and  run 
```
`folder` is windows-speak.

.. code-block:: console

>      $ cabal run

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I'm a big fan of this change. I'd rather (1) put the component's name back and (2) mention in the text that with one executable in the package, `cabal run` is smart enough to infer it, so the name can be omitted.

Author: Done

Getting Started
===============

Installing Cabal
----------------

The easiest and recommended way to install the ``cabal`` command-line tool 
on Linux, macOS, FreeBSD or Windows is through `ghcup <https://www.haskell.org/ghcup/>`__. 
It installs the "Haskell toolchain" which includes Cabal,
the Haskell compiler `GHC <https://www.haskell.org/ghc/>`__ 
and optionally other useful Haskell tools.

Creating a new application
--------------------------

We create a minimal Haskell application to get a quick overview 

> about the ``cabal`` commandline tool:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the ``cabal`` commandline tool:
```

1. How to initialize a Haskell package.
2. How files are organized inside a package.
3. How to compile Haskell files and run a resulting executable.
4. How to manage external dependencies.

Initializing an application
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To initialize a new Haskell application, run

.. code-block:: console

    $ cabal init myapp --non-interactive

in a terminal. This generates the following files in a new ``myapp`` directory:

.. code-block:: console

    $ tree
    .
    └── myapp
        ├── app
        │   └── Main.hs
        ├── CHANGELOG.md
        └── myapp.cabal

> The ``myapp.cabal`` file  is a package description file, commonly referred to as a “Cabal file”:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``myapp.cabal`` file is a package description file, commonly referred to as a “Cabal file”:
```

.. code-block:: cabal

    cabal-version:      3.0
    name:               myapp
    version:            0.1.0.0
    -- ...

    executable myapp
        import:           warnings
        main-is:          Main.hs
        build-depends:    base ^>=4.19.0.0
        hs-source-dirs:   app
        default-language: Haskell2010

It contains metadata (package name and version, author name, license, etc.) and sections
to define package components. Components can be used to split large codebases into smaller, 
more managable building blocks.
A component can be of one of several types (executable, library, etc.) and describes, 
among other things, the location of source files and its dependencies.
The ``myapp.cabal`` file above defines a single component named ``myapp`` of the executable type.

> Inside that ``executable`` section ``build-depends`` lists the dependencies of this component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inside the ``executable`` section, the ``build-depends`` field lists the dependencies of this component.
```

``app/Main.hs`` is where your executable's code lives:

.. code-block:: haskell

    module Main where

    main :: IO ()
    main = putStrLn "Hello, Haskell!"

> To run the executable, switch into the project directory with ``cd myapp`` and  run 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run the executable, switch into the application directory with ``cd myapp`` and  run 
```

   need to update the package index, you can do this by running ``cabal
   update``.

In our ``myapp.cabal`` file we'll update the ``build-depends`` attribute of

> the ``executable myapp`` section to include ``haskell-say``:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the executable section to include ``haskell-say``:
```

I think this will be easier on the reader. It's clear what we mean here anyway I think.

   need to update the package index, you can do this by running ``cabal
   update``.

> In our ``myapp.cabal`` file we'll update the ``build-depends`` attribute of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our ``myapp.cabal`` file we'll update the ``build-depends`` field of
```

        /    /  /    /   \    \
       /____/  /____/     \____\

Running a single-file Haskell script
------------------------------------

Cabal also supports running a single self-contained Haskell script like 
the following file named ``myscript``:

.. code-block:: haskell
    
    #!/usr/bin/env cabal
    {- cabal:
    build-depends:
      base ^>=4.19.0.0,
      haskell-say ^>=1.0.0.0
    -}

    import HaskellSay (haskellSay)

    main :: IO ()
    main = haskellSay "Hello, Haskell!"

The necessary sections of a ``.cabal`` file are placed
directly into the script as a comment.

> To execute this script, run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the sam ``cabal run`` command to execute this script:
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ cabal run myscript

> On Unix-like systems this can be run directly with execute permission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On Unix-like systems, a script can be run directly with the execute permission.
```

.. code-block:: console

    $ chmod +x myscript
    $ ./myscript
       ________________________________________________________
      /                                                        \
     | Hello, Haskell!                                          |
      \____       _____________________________________________/
           \    /
            \  /
             \/
       _____   _____
       \    \  \    \
        \    \  \    \
         \    \  \    \
          \    \  \    \  \-----------|
           \    \  \    \  \          |
            \    \  \    \  \---------|
            /    /  /     \
           /    /  /       \  \-------|
          /    /  /    ^    \  \      |
         /    /  /    / \    \  \ ----|
        /    /  /    /   \    \
       /____/  /____/     \____\

> Project metadata can also be included:

Reviewer 2: Let's ditch this detail? I think it's enough for a getting started session and all rest should be read in the respective manual section (handily referenced below).

Author: Removed

        /    /  /    /   \    \
       /____/  /____/     \____\

Running a single-file Haskell script
------------------------------------

Cabal also supports to run a single self-contained Haskell script like 

> the following file named ``myscript``:

Reviewer 4: I was kind of expecting the haskell-say example to be used here. It would feel more like a natural continuation of what has been written so far.

Author: Good point. I made the examples the same.

        /    /  /    /   \    \
       /____/  /____/     \____\

Running a single-file Haskell script
------------------------------------

> Cabal also supports running a single self-contained Haskell script like 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cabal also supports running single-file Haskell scrips like 
```

    main :: IO ()
    main = getLine >>= print . chunksOf 3

> The important sections of a ``.cabal`` file are placed

Reviewer 5: "The" seems correct there to me; plus I think "necessary" (insofar as they're needed for the script to work) in place of "important".

> The important sections of a ``.cabal`` file are placed

Reviewer 2: Thank you Brandon, I'm happy with your suggestion.

> The important sections of a ``.cabal`` file are placed

Author: Replaced "important" with "necessary"
